---
layout: post
title:  "What I learned while studying"
date:   2020-10-15 16:00:00 +0100
categories: [personal]
---


### Good and bad habits
Not sure if I am particularly bad at focusing, but I am very easily distracted. It is impossible for me to study next to other people who are talking or even just whispering. This was the initial reason why I began studying at the university's library. But after a while, this became my habit. Entering the library meant, that it's time to focus. Every 2-3 hours I would take a break,  and either get out for lunch or snacks and socialize, or go to the gym. The workouts proved particularly useful as I realized, that the best way to regain some mental energy and motivation is physical exercise.

### Allocating time
A day has only so many hours, and a week has only so many days. That means it is necessary to make decisions about how to spend the available time. I stopped going to lectures for example that gave me nothing in return, and would instead study on my own, as this would yield the higher return value per time. For me "studying" was the constant feeling that there is not enough time to do everything. And perhaps this is exactly what drove me most, because one has to stay on track all the time. During this time period I also comleted a lot of side projects, such as creating websites, improving my photography skills etc, because they mattered to me and I somehow found the time in between other, more important tasks. Coming back to the topic of rewards, I would also use some of these fun projects as a gratification for completing more difficult tasks in my studies. All in all I would argue, that during my studies where time was a precious resource, I managed to cram in the most tasks by ditching everything that is not important to me.

### But there is one sneaky procrastination trap...
Speaking of time allocation, tasks and limited resources: There is one form of procrastination that I find particularly dangerous for people who would have many items on their TODO list. Even worse if these items are difficult tasks, that require someone to overcome his or her reluctance to get started. And this form of procrastination is _doing other tasks as a time filler_. I'm sure many people have experienced this. There is a huge important task that needs to be done. And suddenly cleaning the appartment becomes more interesting. And it's the perfect opportunity to lie to ourselves, because we feel like we are doing something that has to be done anyway. We feel productive in some form, just not for the one task that would require our attention.

From my personal experience, but also people I talked to, I found that this form of procrastination is particularly problematic for students. There are so many ways that they can spend their time _thinking_ that it's good for their studies, when in fact it's procrastenation and time passing. A basic example would be this: During the lectures we are taking notes and copying the blackborad with the professors writing. Once at home, I could either just get started with the exercises to force me to understand everything I have written down, or I could first start by writing down a clean copy of the hastily taken notes. The latter is most likely a complete waste of time, designed to simply make us feel good for supposedly doing something for our studies, when in fact we barely advanced anything. The exception might be someone studying foreign languages, and going through the writing process when creating a clean copy will help with the learning. But with anything mathematical? There is only one way to learn it: and that's by looking at it, thinking about it and trying to apply it to some problem. Of course this is cognitively far more demanding and exhausting, but that's how you know you are on the right path.

### Quick side note about laziness in companies
The form of procrastination I described in the previous section boils down to laziness, as we pick a task that seems to have something to do with our goal, for example writing a clean copy of our lecture notes, but requires less effort than the task that we actually would have to complete, in this case solving the exercise sheet. I have observed a very similar mentality also among experienced pepole who are already in their work life. It is so easy to come up with new ideas for projects or whatever. Following through with these ideas is what requires real effort. Some people see themselves as big thinkers because they have new ideas every week. But more oftne than not I just see someone who is too lazy to do the actual work that comes after having an idea: making it a reality. And on a side-side note, this is also a reason why it's completely irrelevant to think "hey, I had the same idea!" when hearing about a new super cool startup or product. Ideas are easy to have, the tenacity to realize these ideas not however!

### Tackling new problems
Apologies for getting side tracked here. Back in University I ran into problems in almost every lecture, usually straight from the beginning. The theory taught in the engineering courses is complicated, at least to me, and I would often lack the math skills to solve them right off the bat. Over time I got used to this and was no longer thrown off track when encountering a new difficulty. Actually, I started to expect problems in everything I did. I was certain that new tasks would not be easy. By adopting this attitude I was rarely disappointed, and sometimes even pleasantly surprised when something was actually easy. It's imporant to note, that runnning into problems does not reflect badly on you. It does not say anything about your intelligence. All it does say is that you are out of your comfort zone, and tackling a problem you have not been confronted with before. 

The mindset of getting used to problems is probably the most valuable lesson that students learn at the university I went to. It increases the mental resilience and you're less likely to become frustrated and give up. Even years after finishing my degree I can feel the benefits of this mental training. Compared to before doing my studies, I now keep trying different angles until I solve a problem. It's just part of the challenge.

### Collaborate with competitors
The harsh student's world reality is, that universities often adjust the grading curve such that a certain percentile fails or passes a semester. With hundreds of students, the teaching staff cannot possibly get to know each individual and grade on a personal level. It is however possible to grade hundreds of students based on statistical measures. The issue this creates for students is, that technically every other student is competition. If others excel in one particular course it would mean, that I myself would have worse odds to pass the same exams as them.

However, studying at a unverisity is very difficuly to begin with, and it's in my opinion absolutely necessary to collaborate with others. This can be exchange of information, or letting someone know of important short-term changes etc. I learned, that even though other students are theoretically competition, I'm far better off by pooling resources and being social, as this would give everyone the same, better chance. As usual there were a few individuals who would try to only consume from others, but never give something in return. These people became quickly known for their selfish behaviour. As a result, others did not trust them and only few shared information with these individuals.

### And the actual engineering part?
I learned less about engineering than I expected before signing up. At the same time I also gained knowledge about things that I did not even know existed before I studied. On the other hand the best time of my studies was towards the very end, where I would start connecting the dots. I started to actually understand theory at its core which a few years before I would never have thought would be possible. And this feeling is amazing.